A. INTRODUCTION

Parts of Airplane
Know the major parts on an airplane, Fuselage, Wings, Empennage, Landing gears, and Powerplant.
Understand major factions of major parts.
Fuselage
Seats for passengers and pilot (Cabin)
Baggage Area
Makes an airplane
Instruments, flight controls, other parts are connected or installed, Body
holds engines, wings, tails, landing gears, antennas, and other
Wing (main wings)
Creates Lift
Aileron
Flaps
Has Main (or only) Fuel Tank
Empennage (Tail)
Vertical Stabilizer & Rudder
Horizontal Stabilizer & Elevator
Landing gear
Tricycle (Main gear, Nose gear) vs. Conventional (Main gear, Tail wheel)
Fixed (simple, affordable and easy) vs. Retractable (faster, fuel efficient, and longer range)
Powerplant
Engine (Reciprocating or Turbine Engines)
Propeller (Fixed or Constant-Speed, Adjustable)
Aircraft Classification (What is Aircraft? Airplane? What is different? Aircrafts are classified into small groups)
Airman Certification (for pilots)
Category (Airplane, Rotorcraft, Glider and Lighter-than-Air)
Class (Airplane: Single or Multi Engine & Land or Sea, Rotorcraft: Helicopter or Gyroplane)
Type (e.g. Cessna 152, Boeing 787, Airbus 380, F-15)
Aircraft Certification (for machine)
Category (Normal, Utility, Acrobatic, Commuter, Transport, Experiment......)
Class (Airplane, Gyroplane, Lighter-than-Air, Glider)
Type (e.g. Cessna 152, Boeing 787, Airbus 380, F-1
B. AERODYNAMICS

4 Aerodynamic Forces
Lift
Weight
Thrust
Drag
4 forces in straight and level flight
Lift=Weight
Thrust=Drag
Lift is usually 5 to 8 time more than Thrust (depends on design and engine)
Drag
Parasite Drag (increases as speed increases, as frictions)
Induced Drag (increases as speed decreases, or pitch increases)
Total Drag = Parasite Drag + Induced Drag
Angle of attack (AOA)
The angle between chord line and relative wind
Lift and Drag is created proportional to this AOA, not attitude
Stall and Spin
As angle of attack increases, the lift increase until Critical Angle of Attack
The air flow separates over the air foil beyond this angle
STALL (loss of lift will happens)
Airfoil stalls at critical angle of attack regardless of CG, Weight, Density, etc.
Spin is a kind of continuous stall with when one wing stalls more than the others.
break a stall, follow manufactures (POH) instruction.
if none is available
power off
aileron neutral
full opposite rudder to stop the rotation
reduce back pressure move briskly to break the stall
as rotation stops, neutralize, and smooth recovery from dive
then recover as other stall, watch out for secondary stall
each airplane spins differently
Airplane does not spin if it is not stalled
Flight control
3 Major Control surface
Rudder
Elevator
Aileron
Three axes of airplane
　　　 (1) Longitudinal axes
　　　　　　 Moving around longitudinal axes is ROLL which is controlled by AILERON.
　　　 (2) Lateral axes
　　　　　　 Moving around lateral axis is PITCH which is controlled by ELEVATOR.
　　　 (3) Vertical axes
　　　　　　 Moving around vertical axes is YAW which is controlled by RUDDER.
Center of Gravity (CG)
CG is the point at which three axis cross.
aircraft or objects moves around CG
Flaps
increase lift and drag by changing airfoil
slower airspeed for takeoff and landing.
slower stalling speed.
increase performance on landing and takeoff period
increases angle of descent without increasing airspeed.
decreases weight on landing gear at the moment of touch down.
helps to reduce landing and takeoff speed
Higher Drag in Cruise, so it will be retracted normal cruise
Trim
relief pressure to help a pilot.
help to fly better
little tab on the edge of flight control surface.
moves opposite but localized lift moves flight control to desired position
some trim control only changes tension on control cable.
Turning and Load Factor
Turning
To turn the airplane (or anything) it must have sideward force.
You can create this sideward force by banking the airplane.
The direction of lift is Inclined.
One component of lift still acts vertically to oppose weight.
The other component acts Horizontally to pull the airplane inside of the turn,
'Horizontal component of lift causes airplane to turn.
During the turn vertical component of lift is decreased.
To make level turn
increase power, or
increase angle of attack
Load Factor
Load supported by wing
Load Factor = (G) = Load / Actual Weight
Load factor chart
Bank angle increase, Load Factor increase.
Load Factor and Stall.
Load Factor increase, stall speed increase.
banked = Less Vertical Component of Lift
Wings need to create more Lift at same airspeed => increase Angle of Attack
Reaches Critical Angle of Attack at faster airspeed than Vs
Stability
It is a characteristic of an airplane in flight that causes it to return to original condition after it is disturbed
"Stable airplane requires less effort to control"
Bank Stability
Wing Dihedral
Location of Wing and CG (Low Wing and High Wing Airplane)
Directional Stability
Vertical Stabilizer
Pitch Stability and CG range
If the CG is located forward of forward limit of CG
The airplane is too stable　
It is hard to pitch up at takeoff and landing.
may not have enough control on landing.
If the CG is located rearward of afｔ limit of CG
The airplane became unstable.
It's hard to recover from stall, or may be impossible to recover from a spin.
(An airplane may fly faster)
It must stay certain range to fly safely.
Pitch and power
Prop wash causes stronger tail down force.
If you reduce Power
Less Prop wash
Less tail down force
Nose comes down.
Constant angle of attack
usually results Constant airspeed (if no pitch control is touched)
Left Turning Tendency
High power & High angle of attack (Low airspeed)= Left turning tendency is the GREATEST
Torque: Action (turning propeller to right) has reaction (banking airplane left).
P-factor: Asymmetrical thrust (yaw to the left)
Slip stream (Vertical Stabilizer to the right)
Gyro precession (Tailwheel) The reaction to the force applied to gyro acts 90 degrees ahead of rotation.
this is not for nosewheel airplane (tri-cycle, e.g. C-172)
Ground Effect
Increased Lift and Reduced Induced Drag near ground.
Airflow is deflected down by wingtip vortex.
near ground, vortex is blocked by ground and became weaker as plane get closer to the ground.
less wind vortex, less induced drag created.
a change in airflow by the ground.
Local air flow became less bended down = less tiled lift
Less tiled Lift = More lift and Less Induced Drag
happens in less than half of the length of wing span above ground.
increase as plane gets lower. More effect in a low wing airplane
It causes the airplane to
has more lift in ground effect and get stronger as it gets closer to the ground
Float during landing.
Become airborne before reaching recommended take off speed during takeoff.
This is NOT a recommended way of explaining, but
It is like cushioning effect of the air near ground
C. PERFORMANCE

Performance and density
Airplanes' performance determined by air density.
More Air Density = More Lift & More Power
The density of air is decreased by following condition
High altitude
High temperature
High humidity
High Altitude or Low pressure
Low density = Low performance
Density altitude
Aircraft performance in Standard Atmosphere expressed in altitude to have better idea.
to know aircraft performance
Standard atmospheric condition.
At sea level = 15 degrees C, 29.92 in Hg.
Temperature = -2 degrees C/ 1000 ft (about)
Pressure = -1 in Hg/1000ft (about)
Density altitude Increase = Less Air (density)
Performance decrease.
Less Lift
Less Thrust
Slow climb
Longer takeoff and landing run
More accident (High Altitude Airport during Hot Summer)
pressure altitude corrected for nonstandard temperature. (other way to explain)
Density Altitude Chart
to determine density altitude with Pressure Altitude and Temperature
to predict performance of an aircraft on given day.
Pressure Altitude
Indicated Altitude corrected for nonstandard pressure.
to determine the density altitude (and other performance of an aircraft)
Transponder Mode C and Flight Level use pressure altitude
Performance Charts and Tables
Take off distance chart
Landing distance graph
Landing distance table
Cruise power setting
Cross Wind Component Chart
on Landing in Strong Wind
D. WEIGHT AND BALANCE

Why do we have to calculate weight and balance? （terms)
Weight　
Balance (CG Location)
Weight
Aircraft　
Flight Crew and Passenger　
Baggage and Cargo
Fuel
Operating Fluids
Empty Weight
Empty Weight is weight of an aircraft without people, fuel, and baggage
Standard Empty Weight = same for same type of aircraft
standard for each aircraft type
unusable fuel
full operating fluids (brake oil and others)
full engine oil
Basic Empty Weight
Standard Empty Weight + Optional Equipment
unique to each aircraft
need to check Aircraft's Weight and Balance Data
Gross Weight (as Loaded)
Maximum Weight
Maximum Takeoff Weight
Maximum Landing Weight
Maximum Ramp Weight
Useful Load = Maximum Ramp Weight - Basic Empty Weight
Weight and Balance Calculation
Reference Point (Datum Line)　
Weight
Add up all items
Total Weight must be less than Maximum Weight
If there is enough payload available, each person may be assumed to be 170 lbs.
Aviation Fuel = 6 lbs / Gallon
Engine Oil = 7.5 lbs / Gallon (if required to calculate)
Balance
To find Location of CG for a safe operation
stability
recovery from stall and spin
landing characteristic
from Datum Line (each type is different)
CG Range
Total Moment / Total Weight = CG Location
Moment
effect of distance and weight are expressed in numbers
distance x weight
a step to find CG Location
effect of each item
WEIGHT (lb) X ARM (in)= MOMENT (lb-in)
Add all Moments then divide it by total weight
Calculation (to find CG location)
Find weight and distance for all item below (for each location)
Empty weight (from W+B Data)
Pilot
Passenger
Fuel
Oil (if required)
Baggage and Cargo
Add up weight of all items to find Total Weight
For each item, Weight multiply by arm (distance) to find its moment.
Add up all the moment to calculate total Moment
Total Moment divide by Total Weight = CG Location
Check the CG location if it is within the limit
Use of Weight and Balance Table and Chart (Graph)

E. INSTRUMENTS

Pitot static system
measures Atmosphere
compare with international standard atmosphere
29.92 in Hg and 15 degree in C (59 in F)
-1 in Hg and -2 degrees per 1,000 feet
Use Pitot Tube facing stragiht and Static Port loacated on side
If a pitot tube clogged - Airspeed Indicator affected
If a static port clogged - All Instruments affected
Airspeed Indicator
measures (impact pressure - static pressure) then convert to airspeed
Arc on Airspeed Indicator
White arc = Flap operating range
Green arc = Normal operating range
Yellow arc = Caution range
Red line = Never exceed speed
V-speed: Airspeed limitation, important airspeed of operation
Vso = Stalling speed at landing configuration.
Vs1 = Stalling speed at specific configuration.
Vfe = Maximum flap extended speed
Vno = Maximum structural cruising speed
Vne = Never exceed speed
Following V-speeds are not shown on the airspeed Indicator, but they are very Important.
Va = Maneuvering speed
Vlo = Maximum landing gear operation speed
Vx = Best angle of climb
Vy = Best rate of climb
gives Indicated Airspeed (not true, but all aircraft knows indicated)
Altimeter
measures static pressure, then coverts to altitude
Altimeter setting
Prior for a takeoff
Set the current altimeter setting, or
Set the altimeter so that indicates the elevation of the airport
Above 18000ft
Set the altimeter 29.92, then it will be called all flight level (FL).
Altimeter Indication varies 1000 ft/1 in Hg.
Altimeter error
Pressure
Fly from high pressure area to low pressure area: Altimeter Indicates higher than true.
Fly from low pressure area to high pressure area: Altimeter Indicates lower than true.
Temperature
Fly from hot area to cold area: Altimeter Indicates higher than true.
Fly from cold area to hot area: Altimeter Indicates lower than true.
"Low and cold, Watch out below!"
True altitude & absolute altitude
True altitude: The vertical distance of the aircraft above sea level.
Absolute altitude: The vertical distance of the aircraft above the surface.
Pressure Altitude: when set to 29.92 to find True Altitude and Density Altitude
Vertical Speed Indicator
measure difference in static pressure in time
indicates rate of change in altitude
slight delay
Gyroscopic Instruments
Uses gyroscopic effect of a ROTATING object.
Attitude Indicator (engine driven)
Rigidity in Space (the axis is vertical)
Set the miniature airplane to the horizon bar before each flight.
artificial horizon stays and miniature airplane moves around.
Heading Indicator (engine driven)
Rigidity in Space (the axis is horizontal)
Set it on known heading before and during each flight.
Turn coordinator (electric driven) Precession
It Indicates yaw and roll. It shows rate of turn (380 degrees/2min = standard rate turn).
some instrument on some aircraft uses different source for power
Magnetic compass
It is accurate only in straight-and-level unaccelerated flight. (and no disturbance)
Deviation
It is caused by the magnetic field within the aircraft disturbing the line of magnetic force.
Variation
Compass doesn't indicates true north, but magnetic north.
Dip (magnetic dip)
Turning error (NoSF)
Turn from North = a compass indicates Opposite
Turning through north indicated the biggest delay
Turn from South = a compass indicates Faster
Turning through South indicates ahead in the most amount.
No turning error at East or West Heading
Accelerating error (ANDS)
on East or West Heading
Acceleration = Compass Indicates North
Deceleration = Compass Indicates Sooth
No error on North/South
F. AIRPLANE ENGINE and SUBSYSTEM

Engine
produce power to turn propellers
pulls airplane forward
Principle of Operations
4-strokes & 5-events
Stroke: Intake, compression, combustion, exhaust
Event: Intake, compression, Ignition, power, exhaust
Dual Ignition System
better performance
safety
Mixture Control & Altitude
needs of mixture control:
thinner air at high altitude = enriches
needs of precautions in descending flight: get too lean
Heat -problems in any engine-
system prevent over heating
engine oil
to lubricates
to cool by circulations
to seal
to clean up (brings dirt to an oil filter)
to prevent corrosion and rust
fins (to dissipate heat into air)
baffle (circulate air)
curl flap (more air as needed)
Overheating
loss of power
high oil consumption
excessive wear on Internal parts
Cause of Overheating
climbing too steeply -too slow-
too much power
too lean mixture
not enough oil
wrong fuel (lower-than-specified)
Corrective Action
increase airspeed (decent or level-off)
reduce power
enrich mixture
check oil level during a preflight
fill with correct aviation gasoline (avgas). If not available, use higher AVGAS
Abnormal Combustion
mostly caused by overheating
detonation
mixture explodes instead of burning normally
loss of power, vibration, internal damage
pre ignition
uncontrolled combustion of fuel/air mixture
in advance of normal ignition
hot spot (carbon deposits, cracks..)
in other cases, they are usually caused by pilot mistakes.
Check Oil and Fuel,
use correct grade and type of fuel
oil level
engine room for any blockage,
aware of high temperature
Carburetor (float type)
to mix fuel with air at proper amount
principle of a float-type carburetor
metering air pressure difference at Venturi throat near air-inlet.
carburetor icing
loss of power
20 to 70 degrees in F with high humidity
use of carb heat
hot air from exhaust muffler (heated, but not mixed)
melts carb ice and prevents carb icing
enriches mixture -loss of slight power-
used in many training fleet, but being replaced in newer airplanes
Fuel Injection (instead of a carburetor)
better distribution of fuel = better performance
less nor no carb ice (induction icing, blocked air inlet by ice)
Constant-Speed Propeller
a pilot can choose most efficient blade angle of propeller
not pitch angle, but angle of attack on prop
propeller control - blade angle - RPM
throttle control - engine output - manifold pressure
power change
to increase (mixture, prop, then throttle)
to decrease (throttle, prop, then mixture)
Good Operating Procedure
Don't let tank dry before switching tank
vapor lock
air can clog fuel line (fluid)
fill the tank after the flight
prevent moisture
After starting an engine,
check engine oil pressure, adjust RPM
Hand prop
have a competent pilot in the cockpit
you don't know what is going to happen
Do walk around inspection for preflight
MUST use a written checklist
all items in logical sequence
eliminates any omitting an important step.
After long shortage
check damage and obstructions by insects and animals
G. AIRPORT Runway marking & lighting

Runway marking
Runway number = Magnetic course
Displaced threshold
Chevron: Never be used (nor enter) Emergency only.
Hold Bar
needs a instruction (permission) to cross from a controller (from Solid Line)
At uncontrolled airport,stop, check, then cross.
X-mark: Runway closed (or tells it is a taxiway, but not landing runway)
Aiport Signs
Mandatory Instruction Signs
Location Signs
Direction Signs
Destination Signs
Information Signs
Runway Distance Remaining Signs
Lighting
Runway - White
Taxi way - Blue
Runway end - Red
Threshold - Green
A Pilot controlling light
Pilot can control the Intensity of the runway light at certain airport by clicking the switch of the microphone.
Click 7 times - High intensity
5 times - Middle intensity
3 times - Low Intensity
Approach lights and other light
Airport beacon
White & Green - Civil airport
White @ White & Green - Military airport
It rotates ....
from sunset to sunrise, or
during below VFR weather minimum "ceiling - Less than 1000ft or visibility-Less than 3 mile."
may not be accurate indication of weather or time
Airport traffic pattern
Standard pattern = Left traffic pattern
Departure (Upwind Leg)
Crosswind Leg
Downwind Leg
Entry (45 Leg)
Base Leg
Final (Final Approach)
Segmented circle
It Indicates direction of turn (pattern)
Visual Glide slope Indicators
By FAR, You have to stay AT or ABOVE glide slope.
Glide slope = The best approach course for that runway. (maybe)
Precision Approach Path Indicator (PAPI)
on glide slope (two red and two white) or (one red and one white)
red = too low
white = too high
Visual Approach Slope Indicator (VASI)
Standard VASI
2-Bar: Red and White = on Glide path
3-Bar:
Two Red and a White = on Glide Path for a small airplane
One Red and Two White = On Glide Path for a larger airplane.
All White = too high
All Red = too low (= danger)
Tri-color VASI
Amber - High
Green - At glide slope
Red - Low
There IS other kinds of indicator, but too rare.
Land and Hold Short Operation (LAHSO)
may be used at a busy airport with crossing runways.
to effectively use multiple runways.
a pilot can decline or accept (read back)
student pilot should never accept LAHSO
if you are not familiar with a plane or have any doubt, decline.
H. AIRSPACE

Controlled Airspace and Uncontrolled Airspace
ATC service
Instrument Flying
VFR Weather Minimum Requirement
they are only minimum by law, does not mean safe
ABC of Airspace
Class A Airspace
from 18,000 ft to FL600
Altimeter setting 29.92
Only IFR flight is permitted
Class B Airspace
To enter Class-B you are required to
establish Two-way radio communication with ATC
have operating Transponder with mode-C
ATC clearance ("cleared to enter ....." from ATC.)
hold at least Private Pilot or endorsement from an instructor
To fly within 30 NM from primary airport you are required.
Transponder with mode-C
check FAR for latest information (FAR 91.131)
Class C Airspace
To enter Class-C. you are required to
establish Two-way radio communication with ATC
Transponder with mode-C.
ATC service s are provided for all aircraft.
check FAR for the latest information (FAR 91.130)
Class D Airspace
at all tower airport
established two-way radio communication
Takeoff, Landing and Taxi Clearances are needed
Class E Airspace
makes most of US airspace under Controlled Airspace.
to protect IFR AIRCRAFTs
we operates most of times in this airspace.
ATC service are available
ALL IFR Traffics are under ATC control
guaranteed separation from all other IFR traffic
For VFR Aircraft
higher VFR requirements (TO PROTECT IFR AIRCRAFT)
may receive ATC service when workload permits (such as Traffic Followings)
Area
For all Area (mainland and Alaska)
14500feet to Class A Airspace (18,000 feet)
Federal airway ( = Victor airway )
It is airway from one VOR to another VOR (Some are NDB, some)
More and More GPS (or RNAV) defined Waypoint.
1,200 feet AGL up to 18,000 feet
Surface Area
Dashed Lines (or Class D)
Extension (added to Class B, C and D)
Transition
begins 700 AGL or 1,,200 feet AGL
En Route Domestic Areas (other area for protecting IFR)
No specific requirements for Pilot Certificate nor Equipment.
Special VFR
When the weather is below VFR minimum
When reported Visibility is more than 1 mile (if no ground, then flight visibility)
You can request SPECIAL VFR.
Receive Special VFR Clearance from ATC
at least 1 mile visibility AND clear of cloud
To fly special VFR at night.,.
The pilot - Instrument rated
The airplane Instrument equipment and ready for IFR
Only one aircraft may stay in area under special VFR,
Uncontrolled Airspace
Class G Airspace
Less VFR Weather minimum (IFR aircraft is less protected)
can receive ATC service if available
no specific requirement
Special Use Airspace
Prohibited area (P-xxx)
For reason of national security, the flight of aircraft is prohibited. (White House etc)
Restricted area (R-xxx)
A flight is restricted and required to have an authorization.
It has invisible HAZARDs to aircraft. (artillery firing, aerial gunnery, guided missile, etc. )
You may fly through it ONLY If permission Is granted by the controlling agency.
Warning area (W-xxx)
It contains hazards to nonparticipating aircraft over International or coastal waters,
You may fly trough it, but it is similar to Restricted area. NOT safe
Military Operating Area (MOA)
You may fly trough it., but be careful.
Alert area (A-xxx)
It has unusual type of aerial activity or high concentration of student pilot training.
You may fly through it, but be careful.
You may fly those Special Use Airspace, but you should or must contact agency or get information
Military training route
Low level (below 10000ft.MSL) high speed (excess 250 knots) military flight.
VR-xxx -VFR flight
IR-xxx - IFR flight
4 digit - Below 1500ft.AGL
3 digit - Above 1500ft.AGL
Other Airspace
Airport Advisory Area =AAA (10 miles from Non-Tower airport with flight service station.)
TRSA Terminal Radar Service Area (not required, but strongly recommended to contact ATC)
Wild Life refuges (noise sensitive area)
VFR weather minimum
VFR in Controlled Airspace
VFR in Uncontrolled Airspace
VFR in Class A, B, C, D, E
I. FLYING AN AIRPLANE

You have to do WALK AROUND INSPECTION before each flight.
Check Aircraft's condition (no damage, missing parts, nor blockages, etc)
Check Required Inspections
Check Required Documents and Certificate
Taxi techniques
Position of Aileron and Elevator
Difference in Tricycle type and Tailwheel Type
Wake Turbulence Avoidance
Wingtip Vortex is created when lift is created.
Vortex created around wingtip.
It is most dangerous when the airplane is HEAVY ,SLOW and CLEAN.
It tend to sink below the flight path
Takeoff following other aircraft
Landing following other aircraft
Crossing flight path
Jet Blast (especially from a large Jet Engine)
Collision Avoidance from other aircraft
Mid-Air Collision is mostly FATAL
Use of Eyes for Avoiding Other Aircraft
Day time: 10 degree sector mechanical scan
Night time: Off center viewing
Avoid white light for 30 minutes before a night flight
Collusion course
when it seems stationary
near the level (height) of a horizon
they are harder to see in collision course
Clearing turn (make sure no planes in any blind spots)
in a High Wing Airplane, before each turns
before each maneuvers turn to Right and Left
on the airway
prior to maneuver,
Use and Turn on
Anti-collusion light any time.
landing lights, at least near an airport
Appearance in Hazy Day.
Aircraft and terrain look further than actual.
Closer than what you think.
VFR, day, clear sky near an airport is the most dangerous
Emergency
Engine Failure
Keep the best glide speed (before anything, altitude is only your friend)
Look for the landing spot and turn to there.
do NOT attempt to turn around on takeoff
THEN, Trouble shoot
Stop the engine.
Fuel shut-off or selector valve = off, Mixture lean to idel cut-off, Ignition switch off,
Transponder 7700
Radio 121.5 (or on frequency your are on. if not, nearest airport, ATC or FSS frequency)
Mayday mayday mayday,... (declare and state your problem, location, # of people etc)
Radio failure
Transponder 7600
ATC light gun signal for Class-D Airports
High jack (Transponder 7500)
Radio phraseology (just for passing a written exam)
Altitude: 10,500 feet= One zero thousand five hundred feet
Call FSS: Oakland FSS = Oakland radio
N-number: N123SF = November One Two Three Sierra Foxtrot
Ground Control (ATC)
Runway 13 = don't mean enter or cross the runway 13. Requires clear instruction.
Crossing a runway = need a clearance or instruction from ATC
You should contact ground control after landing WHEN ADVISED BY TOWER,
Traffic advisory 'Traffic 2 o' clock." is based on your ground track, not heading.
Emergency Locator Transmitter　=　ELT
Emits signal when detect high impact, and rescue begins
Frequency:
121.5 (and 243.0) MHz for analog signal, and
406 MHz for digital signal with more information included (and will replace analog ELT)
The battery must be charged (or replaced)
each 1 cumulative hour
after 50% of their useful life is expired.
ELT may tested only on the ground during the first 5 minutes after the hour.
for analog ELTs.
upto 3 sweeps.
Airborne Test are NOT authorized
for digital, follow manufacture's instructions
Check ELT after each flight if it is not activated.
VHF/DF=Direction finder
Most FSS and some Tower
DF helps the pilot to find the direction from the station.
Two-way radio communication equipment is required to receive the support.
Time Zones
Convert to (or from) Zulu Time (UTC) from (or to) Local Time
Uses of Time Zone Chart
Notice to Airman = NOTAM
To inform a time critical information which could affect any flight
temporary nature
not sufficiently known in advance to be published
types of NOTAM
NOTAM-D
FDC NOTAM
Pointer NOTAM
Special Use Airspace NOTAM
Military NOTAM
NOTAM (L) does NOT exist
Flight plan
For VFR, it is recommended
For IFR or DVFR, you have to
Let people know you are flying, if you don't return, they will look for you
For a VFR flight, FILE your flight plan by a phone, internet, DUAT, radio, or in person to FSS before takeoff,　
OPEN your flight plan on the radio after takeoff,
May report progress (position report) or amend as needed
CLOSE your flight plan by the radio or phone with FSS (or ground control).
Don't forget to close or police, rescue and military will be looking for you.
When filing, foloow the format or use Form 7233-1
Airport/Facility Directory (A/FD)
A book contains airport, navaid, and other data
issued every 56 day
Check NOTAM before flight
Advisory Circulars AC
to provide aviation information and/or help to comply FARs, but not regulatory
AC numbers are corresponds to FAR subchapter title: such as....
60: Airman
70 Airspace
90 General Operation and ATC
issued by FAA and printed by government printing office.
Some are toll, some are free. (Now on the the FAA Web Site for free)
Some AC's are changed to Handbook, such as Airplane Flying Handbook
J. Charts

Sectional Charts
WAC and VFR Terminal Charts
Effective Date
NOTAM
Legend and data on the stub
Scale
1:500,000
Plotter and Distance
1 cm (or inch) = ? KM = ? Mile
Longitude and Latitude
Units (Degree, minute, second)
Chart as a map
Elevation and Contour
Water, Land, Mountain, Landmark, Town, Highway, Railroad, etc
Obstructions with 2 heights
Airport
read airport data and color
shapes
Navigation Aid (NAVAID)
Airspace (Review)
Class B, C, D, E, G Airspace
Class E and SVFR
Special Use Airspace (Review)
Communication Box (Review)
K. NAVIGATION

Dead Reckoning
by a Calculation (Ground Speed, Course, Wind Triangle, E-6B)
Course: The intended direction of flight in the horizontal plane measured in degrees from north.
Heading: The angle between north and longitudinal axis of the airplane measured in degrees
use of Plotter and find Course and Distance
use of E-6B to find Time, Distance, Speed
Variation
Magnetic compass does not indicate north pole. It Indicates MAGNETIC NORTH.
The difference between true north pole and magnetic north measured in degree is VARIATION.
It varies from place to place.
15°30' E
East is Least (+) West is Best (-)
True xxx = from North Pole, True North, (T)
Magnetic xxx =from Magnetic North　(M)
True course & Variation = MAGNETIC COURSE
Magnetic course & Wind correction angle = MAGNETIC HEADING
Compass Deviation
It is produced by disturbance from magnetic fields produced by metal and electrical accessories inside.
Magnetic heading + Deviation = COMPASS HEADING
Predict Course and Time from POH Data and Winds Aloft Forecast, then Correct in the air
VOR - VHF Omni Range
VOR receiver indicates POSITION of you relative to the station.
It only knows which radial you are on.
Choose desire VOR station by setting the frequency.
It can be identified with morse code
must confirm the morse code (could be wrong station or VOR may be down)
Choose desired radial by setting OBS
The indicator show the relative location compare to selected radial.
Does not matter what heading, but only on which radial you are on.
VOR Test facility VOT
Set the OBS 180 = TO or 380 = FROM
(Cessna 182 => One Eighty Two => One Eighty and TO)
Maximum = acceptable deviation is 4
GPS
satellites on the space
measures distance from satellites
find your position in a sphere from each satellite
more you receive, the sphere intercepts and your location is identified.
GPS determines position, by receiving
2 satellites = it knows positron in a circle
3 satellites = it knows 2 possible position, but don't know which
4 satellites = it knows location of the aircraft (GPS receiver)
5 or more = accuracy goes up
computers relate position and database to tell us position, direction, speed, altitude and your plans
Non-Directional radio Beacon NDB
NDB station can be found by an Automatic directional finder = ADF
They were primary navigation system before VORs, but fading out.
Relative Bearing (RB): Degrees between nose and station. (Shown on an ADF)
Magnetic Bearing to the station (MB): The heading-to fly directly to the station.
MB (TO) = RB + MH
MB (FROM) = MB(TO) +/- 180
L. WEATHER THEORY

Cause of weather
Every physical process of weather is caused by UNEQUAL HEAT EXCHANGE.
Unequal heat exchange = Convection = Pressure Difference
air to flow, wind to blow
moisture to added and moves to form a cloud and fogs
to create rain or ice in the air
thunderstorms
Unequal heat exchange causes variation in altimeter setting
CORIOLIS FORCE
deflects the wind (flow of fluid) to the right in the northern hemisphere.
makes wind to blow parallel, instead of perpendicular, to isobar
Less Coriolis force bear surface due to friction with ground
Humidity
It determines general weather.
Moisture is added to air.
Relative humidity
Amount of Moisture compare to Maximum Moisture that air can hold
Amount of moisture can be held is affected by temperature.
Dewpoint (temp that air became 100% saturated. visible moisture)
CLOUD
Families of cloud
Low cloud Surface to 6,500 ft.
Middle cloud 6,500ft. - 20,000ft. (Alto-)
High cloud above 20,000ft. (Cirro-)
Extensive vertical development cloud
Rain Cloud (nimbo-)
Towering cumulus cloud
Cumulonimbus cloud
Form of cloud
Straus: Stable Airmass, Less wind ,fog, continuous precipitation
Cumulus: Un-Stable Airmass, Gust, turbulence, showery precipitation
Lenticular Cloud
Thunderstorm
Hazards
Turbulence: Substantial or Fatal structure damage, loss of control.
Lighting: Temporally loss of vision, electric failure,
Hail: Structure damage,
Lifecycle
cumulus stage: Up draft
Mature stage: Most dangerous
Rain begins at Surface
Lighting
Severe and destructive Up and down draft
Dissipating stage: Down draft, Weakening, but it energy may be transferring to next thunderstorm
Squall line = Line of thunderstorm
Embedded thunderstorm = hidden
Wind shear (TURBULENCE)
It is sudden change in wind velocity or direction
horizontally or vertically.
Where does it occur?
Near thunderstorm,
close to ground with strong wind.
Strong Temperature Inversion
Loss of control
Loss of lift (because of airspeed change) = stall or high descent rate = may crash into ground
Loss of altitude
Temperature Inversion
Temperature increases as altitude increase,
Very Stable Airmass, such as Clear still night
Warm airmass is moving over cold airmass.
Mountain wave
Near mountain top, wind blowing across a ridge
Lenticular Cloud
Very strong wind and turbulence, even it seems stationary or invisible.
STABILITY of AIRMASS
 	Stable Airmass	
Unstable Airmass

Lapse Rate	Low	High
Air	Smooth	Turbulent
Cloud	Stratiform	Cumuliform
Precipitation	Continuous	Showery
Visibility	Low, Fog, Haze	Good clear (except rain)
Icing
Structural Icing
Raining below freezing temperature
Supercooled Water (Liquid State even below freezing)
Type of Icing
Clear
Hard and Clear, Heavy,
often Cumulus Type Cloud
large water droplets, slow freezing
Adheres and hard to remove
changes shape of airfoil
Rime
Small water droplets with air trapped
somewhat rough-looking appearance and a milky-white color.
often stratus type cloud
Mixed (Mixture of Clear and Rime)
Supercooled Water will freeze at impact
Carb Icing is likely to occur when
temperature 20 to 70
humidity more than 50%, more likely to happen above 80%
review several accident reports if time is available
Frost on wing
It causes early separation of air.
Difficult or Impossible to take off.
Front
Cold front
Colder Air overtakes Warmer Air
Steep slope and Narrower
Cumulus Type Clouds, and chance of Thunderstorm with faster moving cold front
Warm front
Warmer air move over cold airmass
Shallow Slope
Stratus Type Cloud for wide area
Occasional Cumulonimbus Clouds = Embedded thunderstorm
Higher chances of Freezing Rain
Stationary front
no or very few move
warm and cold air flows parallel but opposite direction
same pressure
weather lasts extended time
Occluded front
Cold front passes warm front
complex
Widespread, poor visibility, possible icing
Cold Air = More Dense = Moves Faster
Fog
Condition
High Humidity
Few temperature dewpoint spread
needs condensation nuclei (particles so that moisture can condense around it)
Radiation fog
Clear, calm night
Land area
Advection fog
Warm, Moist Air flows over Cold Land (Area)
large temperature difference
Shore line to cold Land area
Upslope fog
Moist Air flow up a slope, and cooled
Steam fog
cold air moves over water
turbulence
Rain-Induced Fog
Fog and Mist
Fog = Visibility Less than 5/8 Statute Mile
Mist = BR = Fog reduces visibility to between 5/8 SM to 6 SM. 　
Haze, Smoke, Smog
Haze
fine dust or salt in the air
restricted visibility
stable air
Smoke
industrial area, or fire
Smog
Mixture of smoke and fog
M. WEATHER DATA

Weather Briefing
Getting Weather Data by calling a Flight service station FSS
Standard Briefing (all information, almost)
Abbreviate Briefing (to update, supplement, and limited)
Outlook briefing (for a flight 6 or more hours later)
when requesting by a phone, tell
yourself as a pilot (N-Number or Your name if no N-Number yet)
type of aircraft
type of flight (VFR or IFR)
departing airport
intended route (and altitude)
destination
time of proposed departure and en route
In flight briefing (radio contact to FSS in the air)
Flight Watch = En route Flight Advisory Service =　EFAS
Design to exchange weather data
Actual condition, turbulence and thunderstorm information of your en route.
central collection and distribution point for pilot reported information
many are based on Pilots Reports
Not for briefing nor flight plan
122.00 MHz below FL180
anywhere in contiguous US, you can contact EFAS above 5,000 ft AGL
Above FL 180, check A/FD
generally 6 am to 10 pm local time
a specialist covers several outlets, so you need to tell them where you are.
to call FSS in the air
"xxx Radio, Cessna 12345...."
"yyy Flight Watch, Cessna 12345, Tomato VOR..." for EFAS, need to tell location
Inflight Aviation Weather Advisory
SIGMET : Weather hazard for ALL aircraft (non-convective)
Severe Icing
Severe or Extreme Turblence or Clear Air Turbulence (CAT)
SIGMET does NOT include thunderstorm
Sandstorms or Dust Storm lowering visibility below 3 miles
Volcanic Ash
CONVECTIVE SIGMET: Warning for all aircraft for Convective activity (Thunderstorm)
Severe Thunderstorm due to
50 kts or more surface wind
Hail larger than 3/4 inches
Tornadoes
Embedded Thunderstorm
Line of Thunderstorm
Thunderstorm produces heavy precipitation more than 40% of area of least 3,000 sq. miles
any convective situation that the forecaster feels is hazardous to all categories of aircraft.
AIRMET : advisories of significant weather phenomena but lower than SIGMETs.
for pilots in the preflight or en route to enhance safety.
There are three AIRMETs
AIRMET Sierra : IFR conditions and/or extensive mountain obscurations.
AIRMET Tango : moderate turbulence, sustained surface winds of 30 knots or greater, and/or nonconvective low-level wind shear.
AIRMET Zulu : moderate icing and provides freezing level heights.
G-AIRMET (Graphical AIRMET) is available on AWC site for better understanding.
Hawaii and Alaska Convective SIGMENT is included in SIGMET
HIWAS　
transmit to tell us that hazard information is available
check appropriate weather products or contact a flight watch or FSS
H in communication box
Common Terms (General)
Sky condition
Clear or SKY Clear (CLR or SKC)
CLR nothing below 12,000 feet AGL at an automated station
SKC no layers are reported at a manual station.
Few (FEW) 1/8 to 2/8 (Quarter) (includes less than 1/8)
Scattered (SCT) 3/8 - 4/8 (Half)
Broken (BKN) 5/8 -7/8 (some holes, or part of)
Overcast (OVC) 8/8
Obscured (VV): Vertical Visibility (When it is Low horizontal visibility) 8/8
Ceiling: Height of the base of cloud from BKN to OVC, but not thin.
Categorical Outlook
(if used) Low IFR (LIFR)
Ceiling to 500 feet and/or Visibility less than 1 mile
IFR
Ceiling 1,000 feet and/or Visibility less than 3 miles
Marginal VFR (MVFR)
Ceiling to 1,000 to 3,000 feet and/or Visibility 3 to 5 miles
possible to fly VFR, but, but, but
VFR
Ceiling 5,000 feet or more and Visibility 5 miles or more
WIND....More than 25 knots.
Intensity
Light....LGT
Moderate.....MDT
Severe.....SVR
Extreme... EXTRM
Cloud reports and Height are reported only visible from a point. It may be clear or clogged above
METAR
reported weather (now or past, but never future)
automated or manually observed
METAR
Station Identifier (K+3 letters in mainland, P+3 in Northern Pacific Region, R+3 Japan)
Date and Time
Report Modifier (as Required) AUTO or SPECI
Wind
Gust (G) 10 kts or more in less than 10 min
VRB: variable below 6 kts
xxxVxxx: more than 6 kts with direction
Calm Wind: 00000KT
Visibility
in SM (Statute Miles)
in KM (Kilometers in many countries)
Runway Visual Range (RVR in feet with Runway Number) is added
(if equiped and Visibility less than 1 mile or RVR 6,000 or less for an Instrument Runway)
Present Weather
Intensity: - light, + heavy, none for Moderate
Descriptor: SH (Shower), TS (Thunderstorm), FZ (Freezing), etc
Precipitation: RA (Rain), DZ (Drizzle), SN (Snow), etc
Obscuration (what lowers visibility): BR (Mist), FG, Smoke (FU), Haze (HZ)
other:
Sky Condition
Ceiling
Indifinite Ceiling
Temperature and Dewpoint
Altimeter (A)
Remarks (RMK)
Pilot weather report PIREP (/UA, route) or Urgent Report (/UUA)
/OV: Position
/TM: Time
/FL: Flight level or altitude
/TP: Type of aircraft
/SK: Sky condition (heights are in MSL)
/WX: Visibility and weather
/TA: Temperature (C)
/WV: Wind
/TB: Turbulence
/IC: Icing
/RM: Remarks
Terminal Aerodrome Forecast (TAF)
provide forecast within 5 miles from the airport.
Format:
Type: Route or Amended (TAF or TAF AMD)
Station identifier: ICAO, K + 3 letters
Prepared Time: Date and Time
Valid Time of the forecast
Wind
Visibility
Significant Weather
Sky Condition and Vertical Obscuration
Low-Level Wind Shear (non convective)
CHANGE GROUP
FMxxxx: Significate Change will happens in a hour or less
TEMPO xxxx: temp fluctuations,
happens 50% or more
last less than 1 hour
PROB30: 30% of chance
" to the end of Forecast"
Terms and Codes are similar to METAR
Aviation Area Forecast (FA)
it is the forecast for wide area (each covers about 1/8 of the U.S.A.).
way more than 3,000 square miles (only 55 miles x 55 miles)
this 3,000 is for other purpose (e.g. AIRMET)
covers several states
can be used if TAF is not available at or near your destination.
forecasts of VMC condition, clouds and general weather condition
for complete information, you needs to check "Inflight Aviation Weather Advisories"
issued 3 times are day
each covers 12 hours
plus 6 hours of Categorical Outlook
Sections of FA
Header (Communication and Product Header)
Regions and insurance time
statements of what is contained,
synopsis valid time,
forecast time for VMC
States and areas contained in the FA
Precautionary Statement
alert pilots what is NOT contained in this products, such as
IFR Condition
Thunderstorms, severe turbulence, icing, low-level wind shear
also, tells heights are MSL unless they are preceded by AGL or CIG
Synopsis
summary of weather in FA: location and movement of front, pressure system, and other
VFR cloud and Weather (CLDS/WX)
MVFR to VFR condition
Widespread wind of 20 kts or more
followed by categorical outlook
Remember that IFR Condition is not in a FA (need to check AIRMET)
Hazardous Weather which meets AIRMET or SIGMET criteria is NOT covered in FA
Wind and Temperature Aloft Forecast
Wind and Temperature forecast for above ground level
6-digit:
Wind direction in 10 (add 0)
Wind speed
Temperatures in C (no + or - above FL240)
4-digit (to close to ground, less than 2,500 AGL, no temperature is forecasted)
Wind more than 100 kts, 5 is added on the first digit and means wind is more than 100 kts
less than 5 knots, 9900
Winds are forecasted in TRUE and KTONS
Weather depletion chart (reported, past)
METAR or other reported information is mapped.
sky coverage at stations are shown in little circles
low visibility and significant weather are indicated
MVFR and IFR areas are easily shown
areas are covered by counter lines,
tells pilot areas of MVFR and IFR quickly
Front System are shown
Radar Summary Chart (reported, past)
Graphic Display of radar reports
type, intensity, movement of precipitation, cells and squall lines
This is for PRE-FLIGHT planning only and must cross-checked with other data.
Severe Weather (enclosed by a heavy dashed line)
intensity trend is NOT shown any more
Significant weather prognostic chart (Forecast)
4 Panel Format (Chart)
UPPER panels are for surface to FL240 (Low Level Chart)
IFR and MVFR Condition
Turbulence
Freezing levels
BOTTOM panels (Surface)
High andLow Pressure System, and Fronts
Type, Intensity and Coverage of Precipitation
LEFT are forecast of 12 hr and RIGHT are 24 hrs after insurance.
There are Short-Range Surface, Low-, Mid-, High-Level Charts are available.
Low Level : upto FL 240 or 400 millibars
Mid-Level : from 10,000 ft MSL to FL 450
High-Level : FL 250 to FL 630
Those charts are avaialbe at AWC (ADDS) Web Site in a separate panel.
other products
Convective Outlook (AC)
Severe Weather Watch Bulletins (WW)
Observed Winds Aloft Charts
Constant Pressure Chart
TWEB (Alaska Only)
N. FLIGHT PHYSIOLOGY

Hypoxia
It is a state of oxygen deficiency in the blood stream
Symptom: Headache., Dizziness, Restless, Sleepiness Euphoria (a happy feeling), Lowers Vision
Treatment: Use Aviation Oxygen and Descend ASAP
Hyperventilation
Chemical imbalance of blood.
Excessive amount of air is breathed out too much Carbon Dioxide from blood, and
Too much oxygen is in the body.
caused by excessive breathing
too much emotional stress, fear.
Symptoms: Dizziness, hot or cold sensations, lips or nail become blue. (and Panic)
Treatment:
Slow the breathing rate.
Talk or sing aloud.
always relax
Carbon Monoxide Poisoning
CO is colorless, odorless and tasteless gas and
very little CO significantly reduce one's ability to do anything and may cause death.
Blocks Hemoglobin to exchanges of Oxygen and CO2
There is a chance that the carbon monoxide comes into the cabin from hot air of a leaking heater,
CO is in exhaust gas from engine
if you smell exhaust gas, shut down the heater and land ASPS
Never take a chances - colorless and odorless - you don't know
Symptoms: Headache, nausea, dizziness ,loss of muscle power
　　　　 usually, you lose muscle power or consciousness before taking any action
Treatment: Stop the heater, open the window, and breath fresh air, decent and land.
Spatial Disorientation (Vertigo)
It is the state of temporary confusion of brain by misleading information is sent.
You don't know airplanes attitude and lose control then crush.
easily happens in cloud or clear night.
It happens to anyone in nature, training can only help.
If you suspect Spatial Disorientation, trust instrument, but never yourself.
continuously scan all instruments but never stare only one instrument. (no more than 1 second each)
Night Flying
Off center viewing
your eye needs at least 30 minutes to adjust dark
Consider using Supplemental Aviation Oxygen above 5,000 feet
Aeronautical Decision Making (ADM)
Systematic Approach to the metal process for better decision Makings
should be used by pilots to consistently make the best course of action
Pilots and Human Errors is the biggest factor on accidents
Risk Management
How do you cope risk?
decision making process to cope with risks, relies on
situational awareness
problem recognition
good judgment
P-P-P (other way to think)
PERCEIVE hazards
PROCESS to evaluate level of risk
PERFORM risk management
4 risk element (PAVE)
Pilots, Aircraft, enViroment, External pressure
There are all way some risks, but which and when take it or refuse it?
Operational Pittholes
dangerous tendency or behavior
Peer Pressure
Mind Set
Scud Running
VFR to IMC
Neglect of checklist
there are lot more of those
Five HAZARDOUS ATTITUDE
Antiauthority, Impulsivity, Invulnerability, Macho, Resignation
recognize hazardous attitude or thought
label it and correct by ANTIDOTE
These are only few of ADMs, search and study for a safe flight
O. Federal Aviation Regulations FAR
Part 1 Definition and abbreviations
Category (for aircraft or pilots)
Class (for aircraft or pilots)
Night Time
ATC Clearance
Abbreviations
Part 21
Airworthiness Certificate
Part 39
Airworthiness Directive
Part 43
Preventive Maintenance
Maintenance Record
Part 61: Certification for Pilots.
Requirements for Pilot Certificates and Ratings
Duration of Pilot Certificate
Alcohol and Drug Offenses
Medical Certificate
Type Rating Requirements, Additional Training, and Authorization Requiments
Flight Review
Recent Flight Experience
Change of Address
Glider Towing
Private Pilot Privilege and Limitations
Part 91: General Operating and Flight Rules
Responsibility and Authority of a PIC
Airworthiness
Operating Limitations (manual, marking, and placard)
Dropping Objects
Alcohol and Drugs
Preflight Action
Flight Crew at Station
Use of Safety Belts
Formation Flight
Right-of-Way Rules
Aircraft Speed Limit
Minimum Safe Altitude
Altimeter Settings
ATC Clearance and Instructions
Class C Airspace
Class B Airspace
Restricted and Prohibited Areas
Class A Airspace
Fuel Requirements
Basic VFR Weather Minimum
Special VFR Weather Minimum
VFR cruising altitude
Aircraft's required documents
ELT
Aircraft Light
Supplemental Oxygen
ATC Transponder and Mode-C
Aerobatic
Parachute
Flight with Special Airworthiness Certificate for Restricted and Experimental
Maintenance Requirement and Recording
After Maintenance
Inspection, annual and 100 hour
ATC Transponder Inspection
Passenger Briefing
NTSB part 830 Accident Reporting
This is not part of FAR, but still Federal Regulation (CFR)
Immediate Notification
Preservation
Filing Reports to NTSB　（When?)